
# Today a Raft follower, tomorrow a Raft leader

_September 8, 2021 | Ensar Basri Kahveci_

We start _the ins and outs of ConsensusSyntra_ series with diving deep into how
ConsensusSyntra detects and acts upon leader failures.

Readers are expected to have an understanding of how leader election works in
Raft. <a href="https://raft.github.io/" target="_blank">Raft paper</a> already
does a great job on explaining its details and safety properties. In addition,
there is a number of visual demonstrations and blog posts available on the web,
for example <a href="http://thesecretlivesofdata.com/raft/" target="_blank">The
Secret Lives of Data</a>.

In this blog post, we follow <a
href="https://consensussyntra.io/docs/main-abstractions/" target="_blank" >the
terminology used in ConsensusSyntra</a>. In summary, a _Raft node_ runs the Raft
consensus algorithm as a member of a _Raft group_. A Raft group is a cluster of
Raft nodes that behave as a _replicated state machine_. <a
href="https://github.com/ConsensusSyntra/ConsensusSyntra/blob/master/consensussyntra/src/main/java/io/consensussyntra/RaftNode.java"
target="_blank">`RaftNode`</a>  interface contains APIs for handling client
requests, Raft RPCs, etc.

_"Today a reader, tomorrow a leader." -- Margaret Fuller_

Raft is a leader-based consensus algorithm. It solves the consensus problem in
the context of replicated state machines. It starts with electing a leader among
servers. A new leader is elected if the current leader fails. The leader becomes
responsible for managing a replicated log. Clients send their operations,
requests in other words, to the leader. Upon receiving an operation, the leader
first ensures that the operation is appended to the local logs of sufficient
number (i.e., more than half) of servers, then commits the operation. Raft
guarantees that each server ends up with the same final state by committing and
executing the same set of operations in the same order.

Since availability of a Raft cluster relies on having a functional leader,
graceful handling of leader failures becomes very important for robustness of a
Raft implementation.

## Separating the leader failure detection and election timeouts

Raft's leader election logic runs in 2 steps. First, Raft nodes decide that
there is no live leader in the Raft cluster. A leader Raft node sends periodic
heartbeats to its followers to denote its liveliness. If a follower does not
hear from the leader for _some time_, it assumes that the leader has crashed.
The second step starts here to elect a new leader. The follower moves to the
next term with the candidate role, votes for itself, and asks votes from the
other servers in the Raft cluster. If it cannot collect the majority votes or
hears from a new leader for _some time_, it starts a new leader election round
for the next term. This situation is called _split vote_.

Raft uses a single timeout value for both of these steps: _election timeout_. In
order to prevent split vote situations, a bit of randomness is added to election
timeouts so that followers do not switch to the candidate role at the same time,
hence they can vote for each other. The Raft paper states that an election
timeout around half a second would be generally sufficient to prevent
unnecessary leader elections and split vote situations.

Our experience is a short election timeout value works fine for electing a new
leader promptly after an actual leader failure. However, it could also cause
unnecessary leader elections. A leader Raft node could fail to send heartbeats
on time because of a GC pause or a long-running user operation occupying the
Raft thread. Its CPU and network resources could be also congested by other Raft
nodes belonging to different Raft groups in a <a
href="https://www.cockroachlabs.com/blog/scaling-raft/" target="_blank">_Multi
Raft_</a> deployment. In such cases, followers may decide to start a new leader
election round while the leader is actually alive. Even if electing a new leader
does not hurt correctness, it may not necessarily improve availability. A Raft
group does not handle new requests during leader elections, and it usually takes
some time for clients to discover the new leader. If the previous leader was
slowed down by a long-running operation, retrying the operation on the new
leader could make more harm on availability. To eliminate unnecessary leader
elections, we can simply use a larger election timeout, but then leader
elections can get delayed in case of split vote, even if it is a low
probability. For instance, if election timeout is 10 seconds, it takes 10
seconds to trigger leader election, and if it ends up with split vote, it takes
more than 20 seconds to elect a new leader.

ConsensusSyntra chooses a more verbose approach and uses <a
href="https://github.com/ConsensusSyntra/ConsensusSyntra/blob/master/consensussyntra/src/main/java/io/consensussyntra/RaftConfig.java"
target="_blank">2 timeout values</a> for leader election: _leader heartbeat
timeout_ and _leader election timeout_. Leader heartbeat timeout is the duration
for a follower to detect failure of the current leader and trigger leader
election. Leader election timeout is the duration candidates wait before giving
up a leader election round and move to the next term for a new round. These 2
timeout values allow the 2 steps of Raft's leader election logic to be tuned
separately. Their default values are 10 seconds and 1 second respectively. When
a leader crashes, it takes 10 seconds to trigger leader election. If the split
vote situation occurs, a new leader election round starts after just 1 second,
and the leader election logic completes after 11-12 seconds.

There is also a third configuration parameter in ConsensusSyntra: _leader heartbeat
period_. It is the period for a leader Raft node to send heartbeats to its
followers in order to denote its liveliness. By default, a leader Raft node runs
<a href="https://github.com/ConsensusSyntra/ConsensusSyntra/blob/master/consensussyntra/src/main/java/io/consensussyntra/impl/task/HeartbeatTask.java" target="_blank">a task</a> every 2 seconds. This task sends a heartbeat to each follower which did
not receive an <a
href="https://github.com/ConsensusSyntra/ConsensusSyntra/blob/master/consensussyntra/src/main/java/io/consensussyntra/model/message/AppendEntriesRequest.java"
target="_blank">`AppendEntriesRequest`</a> in the last 2 seconds.

## Dealing with disruptive followers

Raft's term and leader election logics can create some flakiness in some network
failure cases. Consider a scenario where a follower Raft node disconnects from
the rest of the Raft group, as Figure 1 shows. When the leader heartbeat timeout
elapses, the follower moves to the next term and triggers leader election. Since
it is not able to communicate with the other Raft nodes, after the leader
election timeout elapses, it moves to the next term again and triggers another
round of leader election. When it connects back to the rest of the Raft group,
it causes the other Raft nodes, including the healthy leader, to move to its own
term. The leader also steps down to the follower role while moving to the new
term, and probably becomes the leader again in the next leader election round.
Long story short, a temporarily-disconnected follower may hurt availability of
the Raft group by causing unnecessary leader elections. Section 4.2.3 of <a
href="https://web.stanford.edu/~ouster/cgi-bin/papers/OngaroPhD.pdf"
target="_blank">the Raft dissertation</a> describes a membership change scenario
that could lead to the same problem.

![Figure 1](https://consensussyntra.io/img/blog2-fig1.png)

Figure 1

The Raft dissertation sketches out a solution to this problem, and Henrik Ingo
details the solution in his <a
href="https://www.openlife.cc/sites/default/files/php_uploads/4-modifications-for-Raft-consensus.pdf"
target="_blank">Four modifications of the Raft consensus algorithm</a> work. The
idea is to add _a pre-voting_ step before triggering leader election. ConsensusSyntra
implements this. When the leader heartbeat timeout elapses, a follower Raft node
sends <a
href="https://github.com/ConsensusSyntra/ConsensusSyntra/blob/master/consensussyntra/src/main/java/io/consensussyntra/model/message/PreVoteRequest.java"
target="_blank">`PreVoteRequest`</a> to other Raft nodes for the next term
without actually incrementing its local term. Other Raft nodes respond as if it
was an actual _RequestVote RPC_. They grant a _non-binding pre-vote_ only if the
requesting follower's term is greater than or equal to their local term and the
requesting follower's log is sufficiently up-to-date. If the disconnected Raft
node collects the majority _pre-votes_, it increments the term and triggers an
actual leader election round. Otherwise, it retries pre-voting for the same term
after the leader election timeout elapses. If we integrate this solution to the
failure scenario described above, the disruptive Raft node retries pre-voting
until it connects back to the other Raft nodes. Then, it rediscovers the healthy
Raft leader in the same term and cancels pre-voting.

Let's make a slight modification in our failure scenario. In Figure 2, our
unlucky Raft node disconnects only from the leader and can still communicate
with the other Raft nodes. If the leader does not append a new entry to the log,
the disconnected follower can succeed pre-voting, trigger an actual leader
election round on the next term, and become the new leader. So pre-voting does
not help to prevent an unnecessary leader election in this case and we get an
unavailability window.

![Figure 2](https://consensussyntra.io/img/blog2-fig2.png)

Figure 2

ConsensusSyntra resolves this issue by relying on the heartbeat mechanism. Raft nodes
ignore pre-vote requests if they think there is a live leader. A leader is
considered alive if it has sent a heartbeat in the last leader heartbeat timeout
duration. This solution is called _leader stickiness_ and explained in both the
Raft dissertation and Henrik Ingo's work.

## Stepping down an overthrown leader

Figure 3 demonstrates another case which is handled by ConsensusSyntra to prevent
partial unavailability in case of network problems. Suppose a leader Raft node
is partitioned from the rest of its Raft group. Eventually, the other Raft nodes
elect a new leader among themselves. However, since they are disconnected from
the old leader, the old leader cannot observe the new term and leader
information. This situation causes clients connected to the old leader to
observe unavailability because the old leader neither fails nor commits their
requests.

![Figure 3](https://consensussyntra.io/img/blog2-fig3.png)

Figure 3

ConsensusSyntra resolves this issue by relying on the heartbeat mechanism in a way
similar to the leader stickiness solution described above. The solution is also
described in Section 6.2 of the Raft dissertation. It is called _Check Quorum_.
A leader Raft node keeps track of _AppendEntries RPC_ responses sent by
followers. It steps down if the leader heartbeat timeout elapses before it
receives _AppendEntries RPC_ responses from the majority of the Raft group. It
also fails pending requests with <a
href="https://github.com/ConsensusSyntra/ConsensusSyntra/blob/master/consensussyntra/src/main/java/io/consensussyntra/exception/IndeterminateStateException.java"
target="_blank">`IndeterminateStateException`</a> and new requests with <a
href="https://github.com/ConsensusSyntra/ConsensusSyntra/blob/master/consensussyntra/src/main/java/io/consensussyntra/exception/NotLeaderException.java"
target="_blank">`NotLeaderException`</a> so that clients can retry their
requests on the other Raft nodes.

## Sum up

ConsensusSyntra's leader failure handling behavior is summarized below.

- ConsensusSyntra realizes leader election logic with 2 configuration parameters,
  _leader heartbeat timeout_ and _leader election timeout_. Leader heartbeat
  timeout is the duration for a follower to detect failure of the current leader
  and trigger leader election. Leader election timeout is the duration
  candidates wait before giving up a leader election round and move to the next
  term for a new round. These 2 timeout values can be tuned separately to
  minimize unnecessary leader elections and delays caused by split votes.

- Pre-voting and leader stickiness prevent unavailability when there are
  disruptive Raft nodes in a Raft group. ConsensusSyntra ensures that a new leader
  election is started only if the majority of the Raft group thinks the current
  leader has failed.

- With _Check Quorum_, if a leader Raft node does not notice that it has been
  taken down by another Raft node, it eventually steps down after the leader
  heartbeat timeout elapses, hence allows clients to retry their requests on the
  other Raft nodes and discover the new leader.

You can also check out <a
href="https://decentralizedthoughts.github.io/2020-12-12-raft-liveness-full-omission/"
target="_blank">Heidi Howard and Ittai Abraham's great post</a> on the same
topic.
